---
id: 246
title: Theft
date: 2007-04-02T17:35:03+00:00
author: David Ascher
layout: post


tags:
  - ""
restapi_import_id:
  - 5780561eab8f6
original_post_id:
  - "246"
categories:
  - Canada
  - Society
  - Vancouver
---
Jane got [robbed](http://avantgame.blogspot.com/2007/03/to-man-who-stole-my-favorite-things.html) on her train ride back from ETech.

That brings to mind my experience with a [vancouver thief](http://ascher.ca/blog/2007/01/05/canadian-thieves/), which, it turns out, did not end there, but I never updated this pseudo-historical record of random events.

On closer inspection of the garage, we found that in addition to stealing two bikes, they&#8217;d left a glove. Weird. We called the cops after a couple of days to report the theft for insurance purposes, and gave them the glove (&#8220;DNA testing, you know&#8221;).

The night after the cops came, we (oops) hadn&#8217;t locked the garage, and someone came back and rummaged through everything again, presumably to recover said glove, since they stole a pair of ski mitts. They also took our halloween candy from the freezer, and _still_ didn&#8217;t take the vodka.

Just before ETech, we went for our last nighttime ski trip. Came back at 11:30pm or so, parked in the back to unload the gear. The light was on, which was odd. The door was open, which was worrisome. There was a strange man inside, which was infuriating. I yelled at him (very loud, it turns out), clearly scaring him more than I was scared, even though he had a box cutter (probably mine). He mumbled that he was leaving, and I let him go, which seemed the only safe thing to do.

Turns out:

  * while the garage was locked, a window wasn&#8217;t latched. He unscrewed the hinge and broke the hinge open, then climbed in.
  * he was slowly cutting up the fibers inside the security lock which was attaching my new bike to a cart in the garage (good thing I was feeling paranoid!). Another 20 minutes and it would have been gone.
  * he stole my skanky smelly used-all-winter-in-the-rain sneakers (size 12) and left a pair of much nicer Skechers (size 8 ). Oh, and he left an umbrella

I&#8217;m quite convinced that all of these visits are just from one guy, not very bright, who has luckily for him stumbled onto us, a family that needs a few losses to really lock down our security, because life in jail just isn&#8217;t much fun. I think we&#8217;re secure now. Sigh.